[Docs] update the PT 2.0 optimization doc with latest findings (#3370)
huggingface/diffusers: docs/source/en/optimization/torch2.0.mdx

# Accelerated PyTorch 2.0 support in Diffusers

Starting from version `0.13.0`, Diffusers supports the latest optimization from [PyTorch 2.0](https://pytorch.org/get-started/pytorch-2.0/) release. These include:
1. Support for accelerated transformers implementation with memory-efficient attention – no extra dependencies (such as `xformers`) required.
2. [torch.compile](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html) support for extra performance boost when individual models are compiled.

## Installation
To benefit from the accelerated attention implementation and `torch.compile`, you just need to install the latest versions of PyTorch 2.0 from `pip`, and make sure you are on diffusers 0.13.0 or later. As explained below, `diffusers` automatically uses the optimized attention processor ([`~diffusers.models.attention_processor.AttnProcessor2_0`]) (but not `torch.compile`) when PyTorch 2.0 is available.

```bash
pip install --upgrade torch torchvision diffusers
```

> ## Using accelerated transformers and `torch.compile`.

Reviewer: I _think_ the backquotes were not properly shown in headings when docs were generated? Let's just keep an eye on it and remove them if we see anything weird after merging :)

    If you want to enable it explicitly (which is not required), you can do so as shown below.

    ```diff
    import torch
    from diffusers import DiffusionPipeline
    + from diffusers.models.attention_processor import AttnProcessor2_0

    pipe = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5", torch_dtype=torch.float16).to("cuda")
    + pipe.unet.set_attn_processor(AttnProcessor2_0())

    prompt = "a photo of an astronaut riding a horse on mars"
    image = pipe(prompt).images[0]
    ```

    This should be as fast and memory efficient as `xFormers`. More details [in our benchmark](#benchmark).

>     If you want to revert to use the vanilla attention processor ([`~AttnProcessor`]) which can help to make the pipeline more deterministic, you can use the [`~UNet2DModel.set_default_attn_processor`] function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It is possible to revert to the vanilla attention processor ([`~AttnProcessor`]), which can be helpful to make the pipeline more deterministic, or if you need to convert a fine-tuned model to other formats such as [Core ML](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/v0.16.0/en/optimization/coreml#how-to-run-stable-diffusion-with-core-ml). To use the normal attention processor you can use the [`~UNet2DModel.set_default_attn_processor`] function:
```

    [torch compile docs](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html).

    ```python
    pipe.unet = torch.compile(pipe.unet, mode="reduce-overhead", fullgraph=True)
    images = pipe(prompt, num_inference_steps=steps, num_images_per_prompt=batch_size).images
    ```

    Depending on the type of GPU, `compile()` can yield between **3% - 56%** of _additional speed-up_ over the accelerated transformer optimizations. Note, however, that compilation is able to squeeze more performance improvements in more recent GPU architectures such as Ampere (A100, 3090), Ada (4090) and Hopper (H100).
    
    Compilation takes some time to complete, so it is best suited for situations where you need to prepare your pipeline once and then perform the same type of inference operations multiple times. Calling the compiled pipeline on a different image size will re-trigger compilation which can be expensive.

## Benchmark

> We conducted a comprehensive benchmark with PyTorch 2.0's efficient attention implementation and `torch.compile` across different GPUs and different batch sizes for five of our most used pipelines. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We conducted a comprehensive benchmark with PyTorch 2.0's efficient attention implementation and `torch.compile` across different GPUs and batch sizes for five of our most used pipelines. We used `diffusers 0.17.0.dev0`, which [makes sure `torch.compile()` is leveraged optimally](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/pull/3286).
```

I think it's important to state the diffusers version here, as the beginning of the document only mentions `0.13.0` and it wouldn't be possible to achieve these numbers with it. For complete reproducibility disclosure, I'd state the revision number if we have it (I think it's in your Docker images, right @sayakpaul?).

    ```Python
    import torch
    from diffusers import DiffusionPipeline
    from diffusers.models.attention_processor import AttnProcessor

    pipe = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5", torch_dtype=torch.float16).to("cuda")
    pipe.unet.set_default_attn_processor()

    prompt = "a photo of an astronaut riding a horse on mars"
    image = pipe(prompt).images[0]
    ```

2. **torch.compile**

    To get an additional speedup, we can use the new `torch.compile` feature. Since the UNet of the pipeline is usually the most computationally expensive, we wrap the `unet` with `torch.compile` leaving rest of the sub-models (text encoder and VAE) as is. For more information and different options, refer to the 
    [torch compile docs](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html).

    ```python
    pipe.unet = torch.compile(pipe.unet, mode="reduce-overhead", fullgraph=True)
    images = pipe(prompt, num_inference_steps=steps, num_images_per_prompt=batch_size).images
    ```

>     Depending on the type of GPU, `compile()` can yield between **3% - 56%** of _additional speed-up_ over the accelerated transformer optimizations. Note, however, that compilation is able to squeeze more performance improvements in more recent GPU architectures such as Ampere (A100, 3090), Ada (4090) and Hopper (H100).

Reviewer: It's actually much more than that, especially in the case of IF. I _think_ the percent computation was wrong in the excel, so I changed it. For example, in A100 (BS 1), looking at txt2img in the stable version it goes from 21.66 it/s to 44.03 it/s, which is a bit more than double. Hence, the percent improvement is 103. Can you please double check @sayakpaul?

We could for example say that we get up to twice as many iterations per second, or almost 5x in the case of IF Stage I.

I'm also curious and surprised that the improvement is so big (especially in IF)! Do you have any insight on that?

Author: I did `100 * (b - a) / b` following https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1LrltKSgZyOZiLQ7n7_GvIl_BoED-AHeVOJYBc_QqxXA/edit#gid=0

> I'm also curious and surprised that the improvement is so big (especially in IF)! Do you have any insight on that?

It's probably just better suited for tiling and fusion and collectively they might contribute in improving the overall arithmetic density while minimizing the memory transfers. But need to profile to say for sure.

Author: You're actually right. Let me edit and merge.

    This should be as fast and memory efficient as `xFormers`. More details [in our benchmark](#benchmark).

    If you want to use the vanilla attention processor (([`~diffusers.models.attention_processor.AttnProcessor`])) as shown below:

    ```Python
    import torch
    from diffusers import DiffusionPipeline
    from diffusers.models.attention_processor import AttnProcessor

    pipe = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5", torch_dtype=torch.float16).to("cuda")

>     pipe.unet.set_attn_processor(AttnProcessor())

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    pipe.unet.set_default_attn_processor()
```
does the same.

    Depending on the type of GPU, `compile()` can yield between 2-9% of _additional speed-up_ over the accelerated transformer optimizations. Note, however, that compilation is able to squeeze more performance improvements in more recent GPU architectures such as Ampere (A100, 3090), Ada (4090) and Hopper (H100).

>     

Reviewer 2: Actually can we change the code here? I would maybe structure it as follows:

1. Explain how torch compile can be used for every pipeline out there by compiling the unet:
=> Just show:
```py
pipe.unet = torch.compile(pipe.unet, mode="reduce-overhead", fullgraph=True)
```

2. Then give examples for the most important models:
- Stable Diffusion
- ControlNet
- IF
=> here we can copy paste our benchmark code

>     Compilation takes some time to complete, so it is best suited for situations where you need to prepare your pipeline once and then perform the same type of inference operations multiple times. Calling the compiled pipeline on a different type of input will retrigger compilation which can be expensive.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Compilation takes some time to complete, so it is best suited for situations where you need to prepare your pipeline once and then perform the same type of inference operations multiple times. Calling the compiled pipeline on a different image size will re-trigger compilation which can be expensive.
```

## Benchmark

We conducted a comprehensive benchmark with PyTorch 2.0's efficient attention implementation and `torch.compile` across different GPUs and different batch sizes for five of our most used pipelines. 
In the following tables, we report our findings in terms of the number of iterations processed per second. 

> ### A100 (batch size: 1)

Reviewer 2: Let's also add RTX4090 and T4 no? 

Think people will be quite interested in the home GPUs here

Author: There is a reason why the PR is in the draft mode :-)

    image_3 = pipe_3(prompt=prompt, image=image, noise_level=100).images
```

To give you a pictorial overview of the possible speed-ups that can be obtained with PyTorch 2.0 and `torch.compile()`,
here is a plot that shows relative speed-ups for the [Stable Diffusion text-to-image pipeline](StableDiffusionPipeline) across five
different GPU families (with a batch size of 4):

![t2i_speedup](https://huggingface.co/datasets/diffusers/docs-images/resolve/main/pt2_benchmarks/t2i_speedup.png)

To give you an even better idea of how this speed-up holds for the other pipelines presented above, consider the following 
plot that shows the benchmarking numbers from an A100 across three different batch sizes
(with PyTorch 2.0 nightly and `torch.compile()`):

![a100_numbers](https://huggingface.co/datasets/diffusers/docs-images/resolve/main/pt2_benchmarks/a100_numbers.png)

> _(Our benchmarking metric for the plots above is **number of iterations/second**)_

Reviewer: Good call!
